good evening i'm barbara walters
moderator of the last of the debates of
1976 between gerald our ford republican
candidate for president and jimmy carter
democratic candidate for president
welcome president ford welcome governor
carter and thank you for joining us this
this debate takes place before an
audience and phi beta kappa memorial
hall on the campus of the college of
william and mary in historic
williamsburg virginia
it is particularly appropriate in this
bicentennial year that we lead on these
grounds to hear this debate 200 years
ago five william and mary students met
at nearby raleigh tavern to form phi
beta kappa a fraternity designed they
wrote to search out and dispel the
clouds of falsehood by debating without
reserve the issues of the day in that
spirit of debate without reserve to
dispel the clouds of falsehood gentlemen
that has proceeded the subject matter of
this debate is opened covering all
issues and topics our questioners
tonight are joseph craft syndicated
columnist robert maynard editorial
writer for the washington post and jack
nelson washington bureau chief of the
los angeles times the ground rules
tonight are as follows questioners will
alternate questions between the
candidates a candidate has up to two and
a half minutes to answer the question
the other candidate then has up to two
minutes to respond if necessary a
questioner may ask a follow-up question
for further clarification and in that
case the candidate has up to two minutes
to respond as was initially agreed to by
both candidates the answers should be
responsive to the particular questions
finally each candidate has up to three
minutes for a closing statement
president ford and governor carter do
not have prepared notes or comments with
him this evening but they may make notes
and refer to them during the debate it
has been determined that president ford
would take the first question in this
last debate and mr krafft you have that
first question for president
mr president i assume that the
americans all know that these are
difficult times and that there's no pie
in the sky and that they don't expect
something for nothing
so i'd like to ask you is the first
question as you look ahead in the next
four years what sacrifices are you gonna
call on the american people to make what
price even ask them to pay to realize
your objectives let me add governor cata
that if you felt that it was appropriate
to answer that question in your comments
as to what price it would be appropriate
for the american people to pay for a
carter administration i think that would
be proper to its president mr krafft
i believe that the american people in
the next four years under a ford
administration will be called upon to
make those necessary sacrifices to
preserve the peace which we have which
means of course that we will have to
maintain an adequate military capability
which means of course that we will have
to add i think a few billion dollars to
our defense appropriations to make
certain that we have adequate strategic
forces adequate conventional forces i
think the american people will be called
upon to be in the forefront in giving
leadership to the solution of those
problems that must be solved in the
middle east in southern africa and any
problems that might arise in the pacific
the american people will be called upon
to tighten their belts a bit in meeting
some of the problems that we face
domestically i don't think that america
can go on a big spending spree with a
whole lot of new programs that would add
significantly to the federal budget i
believe that the american people if
given the leadership that i
would expect to give would be willing to
give this trust to preserve the peace
and the necessary restrained at home to
hold the lid on spending so that we
could i think have a long overdue and
totally justified tax decrease for the
middle-income people and then with the
economy that would be generated from a
restraint on spending and a tax
reduction primarily for the
middle-income people then i think the
american people would be willing to make
those sacrifices for peace and
prosperity in the next four years should
i be a little bit more specific mr
president doesn't your policy really
imply that we're going to have to have a
pretty high rate of unemployment over a
fairly long time that growth is going to
be fairly slow and that we're not going
to be able to do very much in the next
four or five years to meet the basic
agenda of our national leads and the
cities and health in transit and a whole
lot of other things like not at or at
those the real costs no mr krafft we're
spending very significant amounts of
money now some two hundred billion
dollars a year almost fifty percent of
our total federal expenditures by the
federal government at the present time
for human needs now we will probably
have to increase that to some extent but
we don't have to have growth in spending
that will blow the lid off and add to
the problems of inflation i believe we
can meet the problems within the cities
of this country and still give a tax
reduction i've proposed as you know a
reduction to increase the personal
exemption from 750 to 1,000 with the
fiscal program that i have and if you
look at the projections it shows that we
will reduce unemployment that we will
continue to win the battle against
inflation and at the same time give the
kind of quality of life that i believe
is possible in america a job a home for
all those that will work and save for it
safety in the streets a help that is a
health care that is affordable these
things can be done if we have the right
vision and the right restraint and the
right leadership thank you
governor carter your response please
well i might say first of all and i
think in cases a card administration the
sacrifices would be much less mr ford's
own environmental agency has projected a
10 percent unemployment rate by 1978 if
he's president the american people are
ready to make sacrifices if they're part
of the process if they know that they
will be helping to make decisions and
won't be excluded from being an involved
party to the national purpose the major
effort that we must put forward is to
put our people back to work and i think
that this is one example where a lot of
people have selfish grasping ideas now i
remember 1973 and they depth of the
energy crisis when president nixon
called him the american people to make a
sacrifice to cut down on the waste of
gasoline to cut down on the speed of
automobiles it was a tremendous surge of
patriotism the hot water make a
sacrifice for my country i think we
could call together with strong
leadership in the white house business
industry and labor and say let's have
voluntary of price restraints let's lay
down some guidelines so we don't have
continuing inflation we can also have an
end to the extremes we now have one
extreme for instance on some welfare
recipients who by taking advantage of
the welfare laws the housing laws the
medicaid laws and the food stamp laws
make over a ten thousand dollars a year
and they don't have to pay any taxes on
it at the other extreme just 1 of their
richest people in our country derive 25
of all the tax benefits so both those
extremes grasp for advantage and the
person who has to pay that expense is a
middle-income family who's still working
for a living and they have to pay for
the rich who have privilege and for the
poor who are not working but i hated
approach with everybody being part of it
and striving for unselfishness could
help as it did in 1973 to let people
sacrifice for their own country i know
i'm ready for it i think the american
people ought to thank you mr maynard
you a question to governor carter the
governor by all indications the voters
are so turned off by this election
campaign so far that only half intend to
vote one major reason for this apathetic
electorate appears to be the low level
at which this campaign has been
it has digressed frequently from
important issues into allegations of
blunder and brainwashing and fixation on
lust and playboy what responsibilities
do you accept for the low level of this
campaign for the nation's highest office
i think the major reason for a decrease
in participation that we've experienced
ever since 1960 has been the deep
discouragement of the american people
about the performance of public
officials when you've got seven and a
half eight million people out of work
and you've got three times as much
inflation as you had during the last
eight year democratic administration
mean you have the highest deficits in
history when you have it becoming
increasingly difficult for a family to
put a child through college or to own a
home there's a natural inclination to be
turned off also in the aftermath of
vietnam and cambodia watergate and the
cia revelations people that feel have
felt that they too have been betrayed by
public officials i have to admit that in
the heat of a campaign i've been in 30
primaries in the spring time i've been
campaigning for 22 months i've made some
mistakes and i think this is a part of a
of just being a human being i have to
say that my campaigns been an open one
and the playboy thing has been of great
very great concern to me i don't know
how to deal with it exactly i agreed to
give the interview to playboy
other people have done it who are
notable or governor jerry brown or
walter cronkite albert schweitzer mr
ford's own secretary of treasury mr
simon william buckley many other people
but they weren't running for president
and in retrospect from hindsight i would
not have given that interview how to do
it had to do it over again if i should
ever decide in the future to discuss my
my deep christian beliefs and
condemnation and sinfulness i'll use
another forum besides playboy but i can
say this now i'm doing the best i can to
get away from that and during the next
10 days the american people will not see
the carter campaign running television
advertisements and newspaper
advertisements based on a personal
attack on president ford's character i
believe that the opposite is true with
president ford's campaign and i hope
that we can leave those issues in this
next 10 days about personalities and
mistakes of the past we've both made
some mistakes and talked about
unemployment inflation housing education
taxation government organization
stripping away of secrecy and the things
that are crucial to the american people
i regret the things in my own long
campaign that have been mistaken but i'm
trying to do whatever though it's the
last 10 days kevin takata presidential
responds i believe that the american
people have been turned off in this
mr maynard for a variety of reasons we
have seen on capitol hill in the
congress a great many allegations of
wrongdoing of alleged immorality those
are very disturbing to the american
people they wonder how an elected
representative can serve them and
participate in such activities serving
in the congress of the united states yes
and i'm certain many many americans were
turned off by the
relations of watergate a very very bad
period of time in american political
history yes in thousands maybe millions
of americans were turned off because of
the problems that came out of our
involvement in vietnam but on the other
hand i found on july 4th of this year a
new spirit born in america we were
celebrating our bicentennial and i find
that there is a movement as i travel
around the country of greater interest
in this campaign
now like any hard-working person seeking
public office in the campaign inevitably
sometimes you will use a rather graphic
language and i'm guilty of that just
like i think most others in the
political arena but i do make a pledge
that in the next 10 days when we're
asking the american people to make one
of the most important decisions in their
lifetime because i think this election
is one of the most vital in the history
of america that we do together what we
can to stimulate voter participation
thank you president ford mr nelson your
question to president ford mr president
you mentioned watergate and you became
president because of watergate so now
you owe the american people a special
obligation to explain in detail your
role of limiting one of the original
investigations of watergate that was the
one by the house banking committee and i
know you've answered questions on this
before but there are questions that
still remain and i think people want to
know what your role was will you name
the persons you talk to in connection
with that investigation and since you
say you have no recollection of talking
to anyone from the white house would you
be willing to open for examination the
white house tapes and conversations
during that period
well mr nelson i testified before two
committees house and senate on precisely
the questions
that you have asked and the testimony
under oath was to the effect that i did
not talk to mr nixon to mr haldeman to
mr ehrlichman or to any of the people
at the white house i said i have no
recollection whatsoever of talking with
any of the white house legislative
liaison people i indicated under oath
that the initiative that i took was at
the request of the ranking members of
the house banking and currency committee
on the republican side which was a
legitimate request and a popper response
by me now that was gone in two by two
congressional committees and following
that investigation both committees
overwhelmingly approved me and both the
house and the senate did likewise now in
the meantime the special prosecutor
within the last few days after an
investigation himself said there was no
reason for him to get involved because
he found nothing that would justify it
and then just a day or two ago the
attorney general of the united states
made a further investigation and came to
precisely the same conclusion now after
all of those investigations by objective
responsible people i think the matter is
closed once and for all but to add one
other feature i don't control any of the
tapes those tapes are in the
jurisdiction of the courts and i have no
right to say yes or no but all the
committees the attorney general the
special prosecutor all of them have
given me a clean bill of health i think
the matter is settled once and for all
well mr president if i do say so though
the question is that i think you still
have not gone into details about what
your role and it was and i don't think
it was any question about whether or not
criminal prosecution but whether whether
you have told the american people your
entire involvement and whether you would
be willing even though you don't control
the tapes whether you would be willing
to ask that the tapes be released
through the examination that's for the
proper authorities who have control over
those tapes to make that decision i have
given every bit of evidence answered
every question that's been asked me by
any senator or any member of the house
plus the fact that the special
prosecutor on his own initiation and the
attorney general on his initiation the
highest law enforcement official in this
country all of them have given me a
clean bill of health
and i've told everything i know about it
i think the matter is settled once and
for all
governor carter your response respond
thank you then we will have the next
question from mr kraft to governor
governor carter the next big crisis spot
in the world may be yugoslavia present
tito is old and sick and there are
divisions in his country
it's pretty certain that the russians
are going to do everything they possibly
can after tito dies to force yugoslavia
back into the soviet camp but last
saturday you said and this is a quote i
would not go to war in yugoslavia even
if the soviet union sent in troops
doesn't that statement practically
invite the russians to intervene in
yugoslavia doesn't it discourage
yugoslavia tempted to resist
once and for all governor carter your
response not a very funny
thank you then we will have the next
question from mr kraft to governor
carter governor carter the next big
crisis spot in the world may be
yugoslavia present tito is old and sick
and there are divisions in his country
it's pretty certain that the russians
are going to do everything they possibly
after tito dies to force yugoslavia back
into the soviet camp but last saturday
you said and this is a quote i would not
go to war in yugoslavia even if the
soviet union sent in troops doesn't that
statement practically invite the
russians to intervene in yugoslavia
doesn't it discourage yugoslavia tempted
to resist and wouldn't it have been
wiser on your part to say nothing and to
keep the russians in the dark as
president ford did and as i think every
president has done since since president
truman in the last two weeks i've had a
chance to talk to two men who have
visited the soviet union yugoslavia and
one is governor hey april herman who
visited the soviet union and yugoslavia
and the other one is james schlesinger
whom i think your company through our
i got a complete report back from those
countries from these two distinguished
gentlemen mr harriman talked to the
leaders in yugoslavia and i think it's
accurate to say that there is no
prospect in their opinion of the soviet
union invading yugoslavia should mr
tito pass away the present leadership
there is so it's fairly uniform in in
their purpose i think it's a close-knit
and i think would be unwise for us to
say that we will go to war or in
yugoslavia if the subject should invade
which i think would be an extremely
unlikely thing i have maintained from
the very beginning of my campaign and
this was a standard answer that i made
in response to the yugoslavian question
that i would never go to war become
militarily involved in the internal
affairs of another country unless our
own security was directly threatened and
i don't believe that our security would
be directly threatened if the soviet
union went or into yugoslavia i don't
believe it will happen
i certainly hope it won't i would take
the strongest possible measures shorter
for actual military action there by own
troops but i doubt that that would be
individuality one quick follow-up did
you clear the response you made with
secretary schlesinger and governor
harriman no i did not as an authority
response well i firmly believe mr kraft
that it's unwise for a president to
signal in advance what options he might
exercise if any international problem
arose i think we all recall with some
sadness that at the period of the night
late 1940s early 1950s there were some
indications that the united states would
not include south korea in a area of
defence there are some who allege i
can't prove it true or untrue that such
a statement in effect invited the north
koreans to invade south korea it's a
fact they did but no president of the
united states in my opinion should
signal in advance to a prospective enemy
what his decision might be or what
option me he might exercise it's far
better for a person sitting in the white
house who has
a number of options to make certain that
the other side so to speak doesn't know
precisely what you're going to do and
therefore that was the reason that i
would not identify any particular course
of action when i responded to a question
a week or so ago thank you mr maynard
you a question to president forward
please sir this question concerns your
administrative performance as president
the other day general george brown the
chairman of the joint chiefs of staff
delivered his views on several sensitive
subjects among them great britain one of
this country's oldest allies he said and
i called him now great britain it's a
pathetic thing it just makes you cry
they are no longer a world power all
they have are generals admirals and
bands end quote since general browns
comments have caused this country
embarrassment in the past why is he
still this nation's leading military
i have indicated to general brown that
the words that he used in that interview
in that particular case and in several
others were very ill-advised in general
brown has indicated his apology his
regrets and i think that will in this
situation settle the matter it is tragic
that the full transcript of that
interview was not released and that
there were excerpts some of the excerpts
taken out of context
not this one however that you bring up
general brown has an exemplary record of
military performance
he served this nation with great great
skill and courage and bravery for 35
years and i think it's the consensus of
the people who are knowledgeable in the
military field that he is probably the
outstanding military leader and
strategist that we have in america today
now he did use gill advised words but i
think in the fact that he apologized
that he was reprimanded does permit him
to stay on and continue that kind of
leadership that we so badly need as we
enter into negotiations under the salt
to agreement or if we have operations
that might be developing on the middle
east or in southern africa or in the
pacific we need a man with that
experience that knowledge that know-how
and i think in light of the fact that he
has apologized would not have justified
my asking for his resignation thank you
governor carter your response
well just briefly i think this is the
second time that general brown has made
a statement that forward she did have to
apologize and i know that everybody
makes mistakes i think the first one was
related to the unwarranted influence of
american jews on the media and in the
congress this one concerned our great
britain i think he said it israel was a
military burden on us and that iran
hoped to reestablish the persian empire
but i'm not sure that i remembered
earlier that president ford had had
expressed its concern about the
statement or apologized for it this is
something though that i think is
indicative of a need among the american
people to know how that
commander-in-chief the president feels
and i think the only criticism that i
would have of mr ford is that
immediately when the statement was
perhaps a statement from the president
would have been a clarifying and a very
beneficial thing mr nelson your
question i do governor carter the
governor and despite the fact that
you've been running for president a long
time now but many americans are still
seem to be uneasy about you they don't
feel that they know you or the people
around you and one problem seems to be
that you haven't reached out to bring
people of broad background or national
experience into your campaign or your
presidential plans most of the people
around you on a day-to-day basis or
people you don't known in georgia
many of them are young and relatively
inexperienced to national affairs and
dentists raise a serious question is to
whether you would bring into a carter
administration people with the necessary
background to run the federal government
i don't believe it does
i began campaigning 22 months ago at
that time nobody thought i had a chance
to win very few people knew who i was i
came from a tiny town as you know plains
and didn't hold public office didn't
have very much money and my first
organization was just four five people
plus my wife and my children my three
sons and their wives and we won the
nomination by going
out into the streets barbershops beauty
parlors restaurants stores and factory
shift lines also in farmers markets and
livestock sale barns and we talked a lot
and we listened a lot and we learned
from the american people so we built up
an awareness among the voters of this
country predicted those in whose
primaries i entered 30 of them nobody's
ever done that before
about who i was and what i stood for now
we have a very very wide-ranging group
of advisers who helped me prepare for
these debates that we teach me about
international economics and foreign
affairs defense matters health education
welfare government reorganization i'd
say several hundred of them and they're
very fine and very highly qualified the
one major decision that i have made
since acquiring the nomination and i
share this with president ford is a
choice of the vice president i think
this would be indicative of the kind of
leaders that i would choose to help me
if i am elected i chose senator walter
mondale and the only criterion that i
ever put forward in my own mind but who
among the several million people in this
country would be the best person
qualified to be president if something
should happen to me and to join me in
being vice president if i should serve
out my turn and i'm convinced now more
than i was when i got the nomination
that walter mondale was the right choice
and i believe this is a good indication
of the kind of people i would choose in
the future mr ford has had that same
choice to make i don't want to say
anything critical of senator dole but
i've never heard mr ford say that that
was his crime primary consideration who
is the best person i could choose in his
country to be president of the united
i feel completely at ease knowing that
someday some new mondale might very well
be president in the last five president
or vice presidential nominees
incumbents three of them become
president but i think this is indicative
of what i would do
president ford your response please the
governor may not have heard my
established criteria for the selection
of a vice president but it was a well
established criteria that the person i
selected would be fully qualified to be
president of the united states and
senator bob dole is so qualified sixteen
years in the house of representatives
and in the senate very high
responsibilities on important committees
i don't mean to be critical of senator
mondale but i was very very surprised
when i read that
senator mondale made a very derogatory
very personal comment about general
brown after the news story that broke
about general brown my recollection is
correct he indicated that general brown
was not qualified to be a sewer
commissioner i don't think that's a
proper way to describe a chairman of the
joint chiefs of staff who has fought for
his country for 35 years and i'm sure
the governor would agree with me on that
i think senator dole would show more
good judgment than discretion than to so
described heroic and brave and very
outstanding leaders and military so i
think our selection of bob dole as vice
president is based on merit and if he
should ever become the president of the
united states with his vast experiences
remember the house and a member
the senate as well as a vice president i
think he would do an outstanding job as
president of the united states mr kraft
your question to president ford mr
president let me assure you then maybe
some of the viewing audience that being
on this panel hasn't been as it may seem
all torture and agony one of the
hardening things is that i and my
colleagues have received literally
hundreds and maybe even thousands of
suggested questions from ordinary
citizens all across the country who want
answers that's a tribute to their
interest in this election i'll give you
but let me go on because one main
subject on the minds of all of them has
been the environment particularly
curious about your record people people
really want to know why you vetoed the
strip-mining bill they want to know why
you worked against strong controls on
auto emissions they want to know why you
aren't doing anything about pollution of
the atlantic ocean they want to know why
a bipartisan organization such as the
national league of conservation voters
says that when it comes to environmental
issues you are and i'm quoting hopeless
first let me set the record straight i
vetoed the strip mining bill mr kraft
because it was the overwhelming
consensus of knowledgeable people that
that strip mining bill would have meant
the loss of literally thousands of jobs
something around 140,000 jobs number two
that strip mining bill would have
severely set back our need for more coal
and governor carter has said repeatedly
that coal is the resource that we need
to use more in the effort to become
independent of the arab oil supplies so
i vetoed it because of a loss of jobs
and because it would have
with our energy independence program the
auto emissions it was agreed by leonard
woodcock the head of the uaw and by the
heads of all of the automobile industry
we have labor and management together
saying that those auto emissions
standards had to be modified but let's
talk about what the ford administration
has done in the field of environment i
have increased as president by over 60
the funding for water treatment plants
in the united states the federal
contribution i have fully funded the
land and water conservation program in
fact have recommended and the congress
approved a substantially increased land
and water conservation program i have
added in the current year budget the
funds for the national park service for
example we proposed about 12 million
dollars to add between four and five
hundred more employees for the national
park service and a month or so ago i did
likewise say over the next ten years we
should expand double this national parks
the wild wilderness areas the scenic
river areas and then of course the final
thing is that i have signed and approved
of more scenic rivers more wilderness
areas since i've been president than any
other president in the history of the
united states kevin takata
well i might say that i think the league
of conservation voters is absolutely
this administration's record on
environment is very bad i think it's
accurate to say that the strip mining
law which was passed twice by the
congress and was only like two votes
that belief of being overridden would
have been good for the country they
claim that it would have put one hundred
forty thousand miners out of work is so
hard to believe when at the time mr
ford vetoed it the united mine workers
was supporting the bill and i don't
think they would have supported the bill
had they known that they would lose
140,000 jobs there's been a consistent
policy on the part of this
administration to law or to delay
enforcement of air pollution standards
and water pollution standards and under
both president nixon and ford monies
have been impounded that would have gone
to cities and others to control or water
pollution we have no energy policy we i
think are the only developed nation in
the world it has no comprehensive energy
policy to read us the plan in an orderly
way he had to shift from increasingly
scarce energy or forms oil and have
research development concentrated on the
increased use of coal which i strongly
favor the research and development to be
used primarily to make the coal burning
be clean we need a hurt his trust
program similar to the one we had in
georgia to set aside additional lands
that have geological and archaeological
importance or natural areas for
enjoyment the lands that mr ford
brags about having approved on alaska
they are enormous in in science but as
far as they accessibility i think about
the american people astray for in the
future we've taken no strong position in
the control of pollution of our oceans
and i would say the worst threat to the
environment of all this nuclear
proliferation and this administration
having been in office now for two years
or more and still not taken strong in
bold action to stop the proliferation of
nuclear waste around the world
particularly plutonium those are some
brief remarks about the failures of this
administration i would do the opposite
in every respect
mr maynard to governor carter governor
federal policy in this country since
world war two has tended to favor the
development of suburbs at the great
expense of central cities does not the
federal government now have an
affirmative obligation to revitalize the
american city we have heard little in
this campaign suggesting that you have
an urban reconstruction program could
you please outline your urban intentions
for us tonight yes i'd be glad to in the
first place as is a case with an
environmental policy and energy policy
that i just described in the policy for
nonproliferation of all of nuclear waste
this administration has no urban policy
it's impossible for layers or governor's
to cooperate with the president because
they can't anticipate what's going to
happen next a mayor of a city like new
york for instance needs to know or 18
months or 2 years ahead of time what
responsibilities the city will have in
administration and in financing in
things like housing or pollution control
or crime control education welfare and
health this has not been done
unfortunately i remember the headline in
the daily news that said ford new york
drop dead i think it's very important
that our cities know that they have a
partner in the federal government quite
often congress has passed laws in the
past designed to help people with the
ownership of homes and with the control
of crime and with adequate health care
and better education programs and so
forth those programs were designed to
help those who need it most and quite
often this has been in the very poor
people and neighborhoods in the downtown
urban centers because of the great lea
greatly our advantaged for persons who
live in the suburbs a better education
better organization more articulate more
aware of what the law is all quite often
this money has been channeled out all
the downtown centers where it's needed
also i favor all revenue sharing money
being used for local governments and
also to remove the prohibitions in the
use of revenue sharing money so that it
can be used to improve education and
health care we have now
for instance on a 7 of a total
education cost being financed by the
federal government when the nixon ford
administration started this was ten
percent that's a 30 percent reduction in
the portion that the federal government
contributes to education in just eight
years and as you know the education cost
of going up god tremendously the last
point is that the major thrust has got
to be to put people back to work we've
got an extraordinarily high unemployment
rate among downtown urban ghetto areas
particularly among the very poor and
particular hmong minority groups
sometimes 50 or 60 percent and the
concentration of employment
opportunities in those areas would help
greatly not only to reach establish the
tax base but also to help reduce the
extraordinary welfare cost one of the
major responsibilities on the children
for new york city is to is to finance
welfare and i favor the shifting of the
welfare cost away from the local
governments altogether and over a long a
period of time that the federal
government begin to have so part of it
is now paying by the state government
those things would help a great deal
with the cities but we still have a very
serious problem that has any point let
me speak out very strongly the ford
administration does have a very
comprehensive program to help our major
metropolitan areas i fought for and the
congress finally went along with a
general revenue sharing program whereby
cities and states the cities two-thirds
in the states one-third get over six
billion dollars a year in cash for which
they can provide many many services
whatever they really want in addition we
in the federal government make available
to cities about three billion three
hundred million dollars in what we call
community development in adesh in
addition as a result of my pressure on
the congress we got a major mass transit
program over a four-year period eleven
billion eight hundred million dollars we
have a good housing program
that will result in cutting the down
payments by 50 and having mortgage
payments lower at the beginning of any
mortgage period we're expanding our
homestead housing program the net result
is we think under carla hills it was the
chairman of my urban development and
neighborhood revitalization program we
will really do a first-class job in
helping the communities throughout the
country as a matter of fact that
committee under secretary hills released
about a 75 page report with specific
recommendations so we can do a better
job weeks ahead and in addition the tax
program of the ford administration which
provides an incentive for industry to
move in to our major metropolitan areas
into the inner cities will bring jobs
where people are and help to revitalize
those cities as they can be mr nelsen
your question next to president ford um
mr president your campaign has run ads
and black newspapers saying that quote
for black americans president ford is
quietly getting the job done yet study
after study has shown little progress in
desegregation and in fact actual
increases in segregated schools and
housing in the northeast
now if civil rights groups have
complained repeatedly that there's been
a lack of progress and commitment to an
integrated society but during your
administration so how are you getting
the job done for blacks and other
minorities and what programs do you have
in mind for the next four years let me
say at the outset i'm very proud of the
record of this administration in the
cabinet i have one of the outstanding
i think administrators as the secretary
of transportation bill coleman you're
familiar i'm sure with the recognition
given in the air force to general james
and there was just approved a three-star
admiral the first in the history of the
united states navy's
so we are giving full recognition to
individuals of quality in the ford
administration in positions of great
responsibility in addition the
department of justice is fully enforcing
and enforcing effectively the voting
rights act the legislation that involves
jobs housing for minorities not only
blacks but all others the department of
hud is enforcing the new legislation
that out law that takes care of
what we're doing is saying that there
are opportunities business opportunities
educational opportunities
responsibilities where people with
talent black or any other minority that
can fully qualify the office of minority
business in the department of commerce
has made available more money in trying
to help the black businessmen or other
minority business men than any other
administration since the office was
established the office of small business
under mr koh vilensky has a very
massive program trying to help the black
community the individual who wants to
start a business or expand its business
as a black businessman is able to borrow
either directly or with guaranteed loans
i believe on the record that this
administration has been responsive and
we have carried out the law to the
letter and i'm proud of the record kevin
takata you respond
the description is made of this
administration's record is hard to
i think it's accurate to say that mr
ford voted against the voting rights
acts we get to civil rights acts in
their or debated stage i think once it
was sure they were going to pass he
finally voted for this country or
changed drastically in 1969 when the
terms of john kennedy and lyndon johnson
were oval and richard nixon and gerald
ford mckean the president's there was a
time when there was hope for those who
were were poor and downtrodden and who
were elderly or who were ill who were in
minority groups but that time has been
gone i think the greatest thing that
ever happened in the south was a passage
of the civil rights acts and opening up
of opportunities our two black people
have a chance to vote to hold a job to
buy a house to go to school and to
participate in public affairs and not
only liberate a black people but it also
liberated the points we've seen in many
instances in recent years at minority
affairs a section or small owner
administration small business
administration lynn a black entrepreneur
just enough money to get started and
then to go bankrupt the bankruptcies
have grown up an extraordinary degree
fha which used to be a very responsible
agency and everyone looked to to help
own a home lost six hundred million
dollars last year they've been over
1,300 indictments in hud over 800
convictions the lady just a home loans
and now the federal government has
become the world's greatest slum
landlord we've got a 30 percent or 40
percent unemployment rate among minority
young people and has been no concerted
effort given to the needs of those who
are both full and black or poor and who
speak a foreign language and that's
where there's been a great generation of
despair and ill health and the lack of
education lack of purposefulness and the
lack of hope for the future but it
doesn't take this to quiet our doorman
minimum enforcement of the law it
requires an aggressive searching out and
reaching out to help people who special
need it and that's been lacking in the
last eight
mr craft to governor carter governor
cutter in the nearly 200 year history of
the constitution they've been only i
think it's 25 amendments
most of the money issues at the very
broadest principle now we have proposed
amendments in many highly specialized
causes like gun control school busing
balanced budget school prayer abortion
things like that do you think it's
appropriate to the dignity of the
constitution to tack on amendments in a
wholesale fashion and which of the ones
that i listed that is balanced budget
school busing school prayer abortion gun
food control which of those would you
really work hard to support if you were
president i would not work hard to
support any of those we've always had i
think a lot of constitutional amendments
proposed but the passage of them has
been fairly slow and human for between
in the 200 year history there's been a
very cautious approach to this but quite
often we have a friendship problem i'm
strongly against him abortion
i think abortion is wrong i don't think
the government are doing to encourage
abortion but i don't favor countries for
amendment on the subject but short of a
constitutional amendment and within the
confines of the supreme court rulings
i'll do everything i can to minimize the
need for abortions with better sex
education family planning with better
adopted procedures now person don't
believe that the federal governor
financed abortions but i draw the line
and don't support a constitutional
amendment however honor the right of
people who seek the constitutional
amendments on school busing oh no
fairness schools and on abortion but
among those you named i won't actively
work for the passage of any other
president ford your response please i
support the republican platform which
calls for the constitutional amendment
that would outlaw abortions i favor the
particular constitutional amendment that
would turn over to the state's the
individual right of the voters in those
states the chance to make a decision by
public referendum i call that the
people's amendment i think if you really
believe that the people of a state ought
to make a decision on a matter of this
kind that we ought to have a federal
constitutional amendment that would
permit each one of the 50 states to make
the choice i think this is a responsible
and a proper way to proceed i believe
also that there is some merit to an
amendment that senator everett dirksen
proposed very frequently an amendment
that would change the court decision as
far as voluntary prayer in public
schools it seems to me that there should
have be an opportunity as long as it's
voluntary as long as there is no
compulsion whatsoever that an individual
ought to have that right so in those two
cases i think such a constitutional
amendment would be proper and i really
don't think in either case they're
trivial matters i think they're matters
of very deep conviction as far as many
many people in this country believe and
therefore they shouldn't be treated
lightly but they're matters that are
important and in those two cases i would
favor them
mr may not repress me for it it isn't
president twice you have been the
intended victim
but would-be assassins using handguns
yet you remain a steadfast opponent of
substantive handgun control there are
now some 40 million handguns in this
country going up at the rate of 2.5
million a year and tragically those
handguns are frequently purchased for
self-protection and wind up being used
against a relative or a friend in light
of that why do you remain so adamant in
your opposition to substitute gun
control in this country mr maynard the
record of gun control whether it's in
one city or another or in some states
does not show that the registration of a
gun handgun or the registration of the
gun owner has in any way whatsoever
decrease the crime rate or the use of
that gun in the committing of a crime
the record just doesn't prove that such
legislation or action by a local city
council is effective what we have to do
and this is the crux of the matter is to
make it very very difficult for a person
who uses a gun in the commission of a
crime to stay out of jail if we make the
use of a gun in the commission of a
crime a serious criminal offense and
that person is prosecuted then in my
opinion we are going after the person
who uses the gun for the wrong reason i
don't believe in the registration of
handguns or the registration of the
handgun owner that has not proven to be
effective and therefore i think the
better way
is to go after the criminal the
individual who commits a crime in the
possession of a gun and uses that gun
for a part of his criminal activity
those are the people who ought to be in
jail and the only way to do it is to
pass strong legislation so that once
apprehended indicted convicted
they'll be in jail and off the streets
and not using guns in the commission of
a crime but mr president don't you
think that the proliferation of the
availability of handguns contributes to
the possibility of those crimes being
committed and there's a second part to
my follow-up very quickly there are as
you know and as you said jurisdictions
throughout the country with strong gun
control laws the police officials in
those cities contend that if there were
a national law to prevent other
jurisdictions from providing the weapons
that then come in to places like new
york that they might have a better
handle on the problem have you
considered that in your analysis of the
death of the handgun proliferation
problem yes i have and individuals that
with whom i've consulted have not
convinced me that a national
registration of handguns or and gun
owners will solve the problem you're
talking about the person who wants to
use a gun for an illegal purpose can get
it whether it's registered or outlawed
they will be obtained and they are the
people who ought to go behind bars
you should not in the process penalize
the legitimate handgun
owner and when you go through the
process of registration you in effect
are penalizing that individual who uses
his gun for a very legitimate purpose
governor carter
i think it's accurate to say that mr
ford's position on gun control has
changed earlier mr levy he is a
attorney general put forward a gun
control proposal which mr ford later i
believe espoused that call for the
prohibition against a sale of the so
called saturday night specials it would
have put very strict control over who
owned a handgun i have been a hunter all
my life and happen to own both shotguns
rifles and a handgun and don't have
purpose at obviously and registering all
handguns and not long guns of any kind
but bait to prohibit the ownership of
those guns by those who've used them in
the commission of a crime or who have
been proven to be mentally incompetent
to own a gun i believe that limited
approach today to the question would be
advisable and i think adequate but
that's as far as i would go with mr
nelson to cover to call a governor
you've said the supreme court of today
is as you put it moving back in the
proper direction and rulings they have
limited the rights of criminal
defendants and you've compared the
present supreme court under chief
justice burger very favorably with the
more liberal court that we had under
chief justice warren so exactly what are
you getting at and can you elaborate on
the county court you think this country
should have and can you tell us the kind
of qualifications and philosophy you
would look for as president and making
supreme court appointments
while i was guilt of jorge although i'm
not a lawyer we had complete reform of
the georgia court system
we are streamlined they structure the
court put in administrative officers for
a unified court system and required that
all severe sentences be reviewed for
uniformity and in addition to that put
forward a proposal that was adopted and
used throughout my own term of office of
selection of for all judges and district
attorneys or prosecuting attorneys on
the basis of merit every time i had a
vacancy on the georgia supreme court and
i feel five of those vacancies out of
seven total and about half the court of
appeals judges about 35 of the trial
judges i was given from an objective
panel the five most highly qualified
persons in georgia and from those five i
always chose the first or second one so
merit selection of judges is the most
important single criterion and i would
institute the same kind of procedure as
president not only in judicial
performance but also in diplomatic
performance secondly i think that the
burger court has fairly well confirmed
the major and most far-reaching and most
controversial decisions of the warren
court civil rights or has been confirmed
by the burger court hasn't been reversed
and i don't think is any inclination to
reverse of basic decisions the one-man
one-vote rule which is a very important
one that struck down the unwarranted
influence in the legislature of
cross-racial populated areas of the
states the right of indigent or very
poor accused persons to legal counsel
well i think the burger court has
confirmed that basic and very
controversial decision the warren court
and so the the protection of an arrested
person against unwarranted persecution
in trying to get a false or confession
but now i think there have been a couple
of instances where the burger court has
made technical rulings where an
obviously guilty person was later found
to be guilty and i think that in that
case some of the more liberal members of
the so-called warren court agreed with
those decisions but the only thing that
i have pointed out was
just said and that there was a need to
clarify the technicalities so that you
couldn't be forced to release a person
who's obviously guilty just because of a
small technicality in the law and that's
a reversal of position by the burger
court with which i do agree well doctor
i don't believe you asked you answered
my question though about the kinds of
people you would be looking for the
court to type of philosophy you would be
looking for it if you were making
appointments to the supreme court is
president okay i thought i answered it
by saying it would be on the basis of
merit once the search and analysis
procedure had been completed and once
i'm given a list of a five or seven or
ten or best qualified persons in the
country i would make a selection from
among those persons if the list was in
my opinion fairly uniform if there was
no outstanding person then i would
undoubtedly reflect my own basic
political political philosophy as best i
could determine it which would be to
continue that progress that has been
made under the last two courts the
warren court and the burger court i
would also like to completely revise our
criminal justice system to do some of
the things at the federal level in court
reform that i've just described as has
been done in georgia in other states and
then i would like to appoint people who
would be interested in helping with that
i know that chief justice burger is he
hasn't had help yet from the
administration from the congress to
carry this out they are emphasis i think
of lee of the court system it should be
to interpret the oh the constitution and
the laws equally between property
protection and personal protection but
when there's a very narrow decision
which quite often there's one that
reaches the supreme court i think the
choice should be with human rights and
that would be another factor that i
would fall presently well i think the
answer has to the kind of person that i
would select is obvious i had one
opportunity to nominate any individual
supreme court and i selected the circuit
court of appeals judge from illinois
john paul stevens i selected him because
of his outstanding record as a circuit
court of appeals judge and i was very
pleased that an overwhelmingly
democratic united states senate after
going into his background came to the
conclusion that he was fit and should
serve and their vote in his behalf was
overwhelming so i would say somebody in
the format of justice stevens would be
the kind of an individual that i would
select in the future as i did him in the
i believe however a comment ought to be
made about the direction of the burger
court be xavi the court that preceded it
it seems to me that the miranda case was
a case that really made it very very
difficult for the police the law
enforcement people in this country to do
what they could to make certain that the
victim of a crime was protected and that
those that commit crimes were properly
handled and sent to jail the miranda
case the burger court is gradually
changing and i'm pleased to see that
there are some steps being made by the
burger court to modify the so-called
miranda decision i might make a
of what governor carter said speaking of
gun control yes it is true i believe
that the sale of saturday night's
specials should be cut out but he wants
the registration of handguns mr kraft
mr president the country is now in and
something that your advisers call an
economic pause i think to most americans
that sounds like a antiseptic term for a
low-growth unemployment stands still at
a high high level of decline in
take-home pay lower factory earnings
more layoffs isn't that really a rotten
record and doesn't your administration
pay most of the blame for it well mr
kraft i violently disagree with your
assessment and i don't think the record
justifies the conclusion that you come
to let me talk about the economic
announcements that were made just this
past week yes it was announced that the
gnp real growth in the third quarter was
at 4 percent but you realize that over
the last 10 years that's a higher figure
than the average growth during that
ten-year period now it's lower than the
9.2 percent growth in the first quarter
and it's lower than the
five percent growth in the second
quarter but every economist
liberal-conservative that i'm familiar
with recognizes that in the fourth
quarter of this year and in the fifth
quarter the first quarter of next year
that will have an increase in real gnp
but now let's talk about the pluses that
came out this week we had an 18
increase in housing starts
we had a substantial increase in new
permits for housing as a matter of fact
based on the announcement this week
there will be at an annual rate a
million eight hundred and some thousand
new houses built which is a tremendous
increase over last year and a
substantial increase over the earlier
part of this year now in addition we had
a very some very good news in the
reduction in the rate of inflation and
inflation hits everybody those who are
working and those who are on welfare the
rate of inflation has announced just the
other day is under five percent and the
four point four percent that was
indicated at the time of the four
percent gnp was less than the five point
four percent it means that the american
buyer is getting a better bargain today
because inflation is less let me ask you
this there has been an increase in
layoffs and that's something that
bothers everybody because even people
that have a job are afraid they're going
to be fired
did you predict that lay out that
increase in layoffs didn't that take you
by surprise hasn't the gun hasn't the
your administration been surprised by
this pause in fact haven't you not
haven't you been so obsessed with saving
money that you didn't even push the
government to spend funds that were
allocated mr kraft
i think the record can be putting this
in this way which is the way that i
think satisfies most americans since the
depths of the recession we have added
four million jobs most importantly
consumer confidence as surveyed by the
reputable organization at the university
of michigan is at the highest since 1972
in other words there is a growing public
confidence in the strength of this
economy and that means that there will
be more industrial activity it means
that there will be a reduction in the
unemployment it means that there will be
increased hires it means that there will
be increased employment now we've had
this pause but most economists
regardless of their political philosophy
indicate that this pause for a month or
two was healthy because we could not
have honestly sustained a nine point two
percent rate of growth which we had in
the first quarter of this year now i'd
like to point out as well that the
united states economic recovery from the
recession of the year ago is well ahead
of the economic recovery of any major
free industrial nation in the world
today we're ahead of all of the western
european country we're ahead of japan
the united states is leading the free
world out of the recession that was
serious a year year and a half ago we're
going to see unemployment going down
more jobs available and the rate of
inflation going down and i think this is
a record that the american people
understand and will appreciate kevin
well with all due respect to president
ford i think you ought to be ashamed of
my statement because we have the highest
unemployment rate now then we had at any
time between the great depression caused
by herbert hoover and the time president
ford took office we've got seven and a
half million people out of jobs since
he's been in office two and a half
million more american people of loss of
jobs in the last four months alone five
hundred thousands of americans have gone
into unemployment rolls in the last
month we've had a net loss of a hundred
and sixty three thousand jobs anybody
who says that the inflation rate is in
good shape now ought to talk to the
housewives one of the overwhelming
results that i've seen important if
people feel that you can't plan anymore
there's no way to make a prediction that
my family might be able to own a home
but to put my kids through college
savings accounts a losing money instead
of gaining money inflation is robbing us
under the president administration
nixon's amp poor's we've had three times
the inflation rate that we experienced
under president johnson president
kennedy the economic growth is less than
half today but it was at the beginning
of this year and housing starts he
compares the housing starts of last year
i don't blame you because in 1975 we had
fewer housing starts in this country
fewer homes built than any year since
1940 that's 35 years and we've got a 35
percent unemployment rate in many areas
of his country among construction
workers and mr ford hasn't done
anything about it
and i think this shows a callous
indifference for the families that have
suffered so much he has vetoed bills
passed by congress within the
congressional budget guidelines job
opportunities for two million americans
will never have a balanced budget we
will never meet the needs of our people
will never control the inflationary
sproul as long as we have seven and a
half or eight million people out of work
who are looking for jobs and we've
probably got two and a half million
people who are not looking for jobs
anymore because they've given up hope
that is a very serious indictment of
this has been
raishin it's probably worse than of all
mr mahad governor carter you entered
this race against president for the
20-point leads or better in the polls
and now it appears that this campaign is
headed for a photo finish you've said
how difficult it is to run against a
sitting president but mr ford was just
as much incumbent in july when you were
20 points ahead as he is now can you
tell us what caused the evaporation of
that lead in european well that's not
exactly an accurate description of what
when i was that far ahead it was
immediately following the democratic
convention and before the republican
convention at that time 25 or 30 percent
of the reagan supporters said that they
would not support president ford but as
occurred at the end of the condemned
aquatic convention the republican party
unify itself and i think immediately
following the republican convention
there was about a ten point spread i
believe that to be accurate i had 49
percent president ford had 39 percent of
the poem so a good indication to
fluctuations but they vary widely one
from another and the only polled i've
ever followed is the one that though you
know it's taken on election day i was in
30 primaries in the spring and at first
it was obvious that i didn't have any
standing in the poll there's a matter of
fact i think when gallup ran their first
poll in december of 1975 they didn't put
my name on the list they had 35 people
in the list my name wasn't even there
and at the beginning of the year i had
about two percent so the polls to me are
interesting but they don't determine you
know my hopes or or my despair i
campaigned among people
i've never depended on powerful
political figures to put me in office i
have a direct relationship with hundreds
of people around hundreds of thousands
of people around the country who
actively campaigning for me in georgia
alone for instance i got 84 of the vote
and i think they were 14 people in
addition of myself on the ballot and
governor wallace had been very strong in
georgia that's an overwhelming support
from my own people who know me best
and today we have about 500 georgians at
their own expense just working people
who believe in me spread around the
country or involved in the political
campaign so the polls are interesting
but i don't know how to explain the
fluctuations i think a lot of it depends
on current events sometimes foreign
affairs i'm just i'm domestic affairs
but i think i'll hold off support among
those who are a crucial to the election
has been fairly steady and my success in
the primary season was i think notable
for a newcomer from someone who's
outside washington who who never has
been a part of the washington
establishment and i think that will have
good result off another in the second
for myself and hope for the future
president ford you response i think the
increase in the prospects as far as i'm
concerned and the less favorable
prospects for governor carter reflect
that governor carter is inconsistent in
many of the positions that he takes he
tends to distort on a number of
occasions just a moment ago for example
he was indicating that in the 1950s for
example that unemployment was very low
he fails to point out that in the 1950s
we were engaged in the war in vietnam we
mean in the korea we had 3 million
500,000 young men in the army navy air
force and marines
that's not the way to end unemployment
or to reduce unemployment the present
time were at peace we have reduced the
number of people in the army navy air
force and marines from 3 million 103
million 500,000 to 2 million 100,000 we
are not at war we have reduced the
military manpower by a million four
hundred thousand if we had that men
more people in the army the navy the air
force and marines our unemployment
figure would be considerably less but
this administration doesn't believe the
way to reduce unemployment is to go to
war or to increase the number of people
in the military so you cannot compare
unemployment as you sought to with the
present time with the nineteen fifty
because the then administration had
people in the military they were at war
they were fighting overseas and this
administration has reduced the size of
the military by a million four hundred
thousand they're in the civilian labor
market and they're not fighting anywhere
around the world today thank you
gentlemen this will complete our
questioning for this debate we don't
have time for more questions and full
answers so now each candidate will be
allowed up to four minutes for a closing
statement and at the original coin toss
in philadelphia a month ago was
determined that president ford would
make the first closing statement tonight
president ford for 25 years i served in
the congress under five presidents i saw
them work
i saw them make very hard decisions i
didn't always agree with their decisions
whether they were democratic or
republican presidents for the last two
years i've been the president and i have
found from experience that it's much
more difficult to make those decisions
than it is to second-guess them
i became president at the time that the
united states was in a very troubled
time we had inflation of over twelve
percent we were on the brink of the
worst recession in the last 40 years we
were still deeply involved in the
problems of vietnam the american people
had lost faith and trust and confidence
in the presidency itself that situation
called for me to first put the united
states on a steady course and to keep
our keel well balanced because we had to
face the difficult problems that had all
of a sudden get america i think most
people know that i did not seek the
presidency but i am asking for your help
and assistance to be president for the
next four years during this campaign
we've seen a lot of television shows a
lot of bumper stickers and a great many
slogans of one kind or another but those
are not the things that count what
counts is that the united states
celebrated its 200th birthday on july
4th as a result of that wonderful
experience all over the united states
there is a new spirit in america the
american people are healed are working
the american people are moving again and
moving in the right direction
we have cut inflation by better than
half we have come out of the recession
and we're well on the road to real
prosperity in this country again there
has been a restoration of faith and
confidence and trust in the presidency
because i've been open candid and
forthright i have never promised more
than i could produce and i have produced
everything that i promised we are at
peace not a single young american is
fighting or dying on any foreign soil
tonight we have peace with freedom i've
been proud to be president of the united
states during these very troubled times
i love america just as all of you love
america it would be the highest honor
for me to have your support on november
2nd and for you to say jerry ford you've
done a good job keep on doing it thank
you and good night
thank you president ford government
the major purpose of an election for
president is to choose a leader someone
who can analyze the depths of feeling in
our country to set a standard for our
people to follow to inspire people to
reach for greatness to correct our
defects to answer difficult questions to
bind ourselves together in a spirit of
unity i don't believe that president
administration has done that
we have been discouraged and we've been
80 dated some times we've been
embarrassed and sometimes we've been
ashamed our people are out of work and
there's a sense of withdrawal but our
country is innately very strong mr ford
is a good and decent man but he's in
been in office now more than 800 days
approaching almost as long as john
kennedy was in office i'd like to ask
the american people what what's been
accomplished a lot remains to be done my
own background is different from here i
was a schoolboy remember the library
board member i served in a hospital
authority and i was in the state senate
i was governor and i'm an engineer a
naval officer farmer businessmen and i
believe we're a crime someone who can
work harmoniously with the congress who
can work closer with the people of this
country and who can bring a new image
and a new spirit to washington my tax
structure is a disgrace it needs to be
reformed i was governor of georgia for
four years we never increased sales
taxes or income tax or property tax as a
matter of fact to you before i went out
of office we gave a 50 million dollar
refund to the property tax payers of
georgia we spend 600 per person in this
country every man woman and child for
health care we still ranked 15th among
all the nations of the world and infant
mortality and our cancer rate is higher
than any country in the world we don't
have good health care we could have it
employment oughta be restored our people
we've become almost a welfare state we
spend now seven hundred percent more on
unemployment compensation than we did
eight years ago when the republicans
took over the white house how people
want to go back to work our education
system can be improve
secrecy ought to be stripped away from
government and a maximum of personal
privacy ought to be maintained our
housing programs have gone bad it used
to be that the average shalt family
could own a house but now less than a
third of our people can afford to buy
their own homes the budget was more
grossly out of balance last year than
ever before in the history of our
country 65 billion dollars
primarily because our people are not at
work inflation is robbing us as we've
already discussed in their government
bureaucracy is just a horrible mess this
doesn't have to be now i don't know all
the answers
nobody could but i do know that if the
president of the united states and the
congress of the united states and the
people of the united states said i
believe our nation is greater than what
we are now i believe that if we are
inspired if we can achieve a degree of
unity if we can set our goals high
enough and work toward recognized goals
with industry and labor and agriculture
along with government at all levels then
we can achieve great things we might
have to do it slowly there are no magic
answers to it but i'll be together we
can make great progress we can correct
our difficult mistakes and answer those
very tough questions i believe in the
greatness of our country and i believe
the american people are ready for a
in washington we've been drifting too
long we've been dormant too long we've
been discouraged too long and we have
not set an example for our own people
but i believe that we can now establish
in the white house a good relationship
with congress a good relationship with
our people set very high goals for our
country and with inspiration hard work
we can achieve great things and that the
world know that's very important but
more importantly let the people that own
country realize that we still live
in the greatest nation on earth thank
you very much thank you governor carter
and thank you president ford i also
would like to thank the audience and my
three colleagues mr kraft mr meyneth
and mr nelson who have been our
questioners this debate has of course
been seen by millions of americans and
in addition tonight as it being
broadcast to 113 nations throughout the
world this concludes the 1976
presidential debate a truly remarkable
exercise in democracy for this is the
first time in 16 years that the
presidential candidates have debated it
is the first time ever that an incumbent
president has debated his challenger and
the debate included the first between
the two vice presidential candidates
president ford and governor carter will
not only want to thank you but we
commend you for being to come together
to discuss the issues before the
american people and i was special thanks
to the league of women voters for making
these events possible in sponsoring
these events the league of women voters
education fund has tried to provide you
with the information that you will need
to choose wisely the election is now
only 11 days off the candidates have
participated in presenting their views
in three 90-minute debate and now it's
up to the voters now it is up to you to
participate the league urges all
registered voters to vote on november
2nd for the candidate of your choice and
now from phi beta kappa memorial hall
and the campus of the college of william
and mary this is barbara walters wishing
you all and good evening